docs/content/user/end-users/profiles-and-verbosity.md, before:

# Choosing Profiles and Verbosity

Many libraries expose a way to run with different diagnostics profiles.

Common profiles:
- `user`: concise and friendly output,
- `dev`: more technical context,
- `qa`/`debug`: deeper diagnostics for troubleshooting.

## Recommendation

- default to `user` for normal workflows,
- switch to `dev` or `debug` only when troubleshooting.

## First choice: use library `A` controls

Prefer controls documented by library `A` (for example, its own verbosity or
debug flags). In many projects, this is the intended user-facing interface.

## Typical runtime override (only if `A` explicitly exposes SMonitor controls)

```python
import smonitor

smonitor.configure(profile="dev", level="INFO")
```

If `A` does not expose SMonitor profile controls directly, do not force it.
Use the method recommended by maintainers of `A`.

Some libraries intentionally keep SMonitor controls internal and only expose
their own high-level verbosity/configuration flags. In that case, use the
library-specific mechanism and keep SMonitor details transparent.

Commit message:

docs: replace library A placeholder with host-library terminology

docs/content/user/end-users/profiles-and-verbosity.md, after:

# Choosing Profiles and Verbosity

Many libraries expose a way to run with different diagnostics profiles.

Common profiles:
- `user`: concise and friendly output,
- `dev`: more technical context,
- `qa`/`debug`: deeper diagnostics for troubleshooting.

## Recommendation

- default to `user` for normal workflows,
- switch to `dev` or `debug` only when troubleshooting.

## First choice: use host-library controls

Prefer controls documented by the host library (for example, its own verbosity or
debug flags). In many projects, this is the intended user-facing interface.

## Typical runtime override (only if the host library explicitly exposes SMonitor controls)

```python
import smonitor

smonitor.configure(profile="dev", level="INFO")
```

If the host library does not expose SMonitor profile controls directly, do not force it.
Use the method recommended by maintainers of the host library.

Some libraries intentionally keep SMonitor controls internal and only expose
their own high-level verbosity/configuration flags. In that case, use the
library-specific mechanism and keep SMonitor details transparent.
